>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SATURDAY, APRIL 15: AMID
GROWING TENSIONS WITH THE UNITED
STATES, NORTH KOREA PUTS ITS
MISSILES ON PARADE.
ON WHAT IS NORMALLY TAX DAY,
CONTINUED CALLS FOR PRESIDENT
TRUMP TO RELEASE HIS TAX
RETURNS.
AND, IN OUR SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
REFUGEES FLEEING THE UNITED
STATES FOR CANADA.
NEXT, ON PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS AT
LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING,
AND THANKS FOR JOINING US.
NORTH KOREA MARKED ITS MOST
IMPORTANT HOLIDAY TODAY WITH A
SHOW OF MILITARY MIGHT AND A
BLUNT WARNING, BUT THERE WERE NO
NEW NORTH KOREAN MISSILE OR
NUCLEAR TESTS, AS SOME ANALYSTS
HAD THOUGHT MIGHT HAPPEN.
THE TOTALITARIAN REGIME
CELEBRATED THE "DAY OF THE SUN,"
THE BIRTH OF ITS LATE FOUNDING
RULER, KIM IL-SUNG, 105 YEARS
AGO TODAY.
HIS GRANDSON AND CURRENT RULER,
KIM JONG-UN, LOOKED ON AS TROOPS
AND FIREPOWER PARADED BEFORE HIM
IN THE MAIN SQUARE OF THE
CAPITAL, PYONGYANG.
OF PARAMOUNT INTEREST WERE WHAT
APPEARED TO BE NEW
INTERCONTINENTAL BALLISTIC
MISSILES, INCLUDING ONE WITH A
PURPORTED RANGE OF 600 MILES
THAT COULD BE LAUNCHED FROM A
SUBMARINE.
KIM DID NOT ADDRESS THE CROWD,
BUT THERE WAS SOME HARSH
RHETORIC IN A SPEECH FROM CHOE
RYONG-HAE, THOUGHT TO BE HIS
NUMBER TWO.
HE ACCUSED PRESIDENT TRUMP OF
"CREATING A WAR SITUATION" BY
DEPLOYING THE U.S. NAVY STRIKE
GROUP TOWARD THE KOREAN
PENINSULA IN THE PAST WEEK.
THE GROUP INCLUDES THE U.S.S
"VINSON," AN AIRCRAFT CARRIER
WITH 40 FIGHTER PLANES, AND
THREE GUIDED-MISSILE WARSHIPS.
CHOE SAID:
NO COMMENTS TODAY FROM PRESIDENT
TRUMP, WHO IS SPENDING THE
EASTER HOLIDAY WEEKEND WITH HIS
FAMILY AT HIS FLORIDA HOME AND
GOLF CLUB.
VICE PRESIDENT MIKE PENCE FLEW
TO SOUTH KOREA TODAY TO BEGIN A
TEN-DAY TRIP THAT WILL ALSO TAKE
HIM TO JAPAN, INDONESIA, AND
AUSTRALIA.
THERE ARE STILL 28,000 U.S.
TROOPS DEPLOYED IN SOUTH KOREA
AND 50,000 IN JAPAN.
PENCE IS SCHEDULED TO SPEND
EASTER SUNDAY WITH AMERICAN AND
KOREAN TROOPS AND THEIR
FAMILIES.
THE GOVERNOR OF THE AFGHAN
PROVINCE HIT BY THE LARGEST
NON-NUCLEAR BOMB EVER USED BY
THE U.S. MILITARY IN COMBAT SAYS
THURSDAY'S ATTACK KILLED AT
LEAST 94 PEOPLE.
THE 21,000-POUND "MASSIVE
ORDNANCE AIR BLAST BOMB" STRUCK
A TUNNEL COMPLEX USED BY
MILITANTS FROM THE ISLAMIC STATE
GROUP, ACCORDING TO THE
PENTAGON.
WHILE RAISING THE DEATH TOLL
TODAY, THE GOVERNOR OF THE
MOUNTAINOUS NANGARHAR PROVINCE
SAID HE HAS NO REPORTS OF
CIVILIAN CASUALTIES.
A DEAL TO EXCHANGE CIVILIANS
FROM BESIEGED TOWNS ON BOTH
SIDES OF THE SYRIAN CIVIL WAR
WAS VIOLENTLY DISRUPTED TODAY
WHEN A MASSIVE CAR BOMB BLASTED
A CONVOY OF BUSES.
SYRIAN STATE TELEVISION SAID THE
EXPLOSION STRUCK BUSES CARRYING
5,000 MEN, WOMEN, AND CHILDREN
EVACUATED FROM REBEL-HELD TOWNS
ON THEIR WAY TO ALEPPO, WHICH IS
CONTROLLED BY PRESIDENT BASHAR
AL-ASSAD.
RESCUE WORKERS KNOWN AS THE
WHITE HELMETS SAID AT LEAST
100 PEOPLE WERE KILLED AND
DOZENS MORE WOUNDED.
UNDER THE DEAL, MORE THAN 2,000
RESIDENTS OF AREAS SURROUNDED BY
GOVERNMENT FORCES WERE EVACUATED
TO AREAS DEEMED SAFER FOR THEM.
AS AMERICAN-BACKED IRAQI TROOPS
CONTINUE THEIR OFFENSIVE TO
RETAKE THE CITY OF MOSUL, AN
IRAQI ARMY OFFICER CLAIMED TODAY
THAT ISIS MILITANTS ATTACKED
THEM WITH CHLORINE GAS LAST
NIGHT.
THE OFFICER TOLD THE ASSOCIATED
PRESS, MILITANTS FIRED A ROCKET
LOADED WITH CHLORINE IN A NEWLY-
LIBERATED NEIGHBORHOOD OF MOSUL.
HE SAID SEVEN SOLDIERS WERE
TREATED FOR BREATHING PROBLEMS.
MOSUL IS THE LAST IRAQI
STRONGHOLD FOR ISIS.
GOVERNMENT FORCES HAVE RETAKEN
MOST OF IRAQ'S SECOND-LARGEST
CITY SINCE JANUARY BUT ARE
STILL FIGHTING ISIS MILITANTS IN
THE WESTERN PART OF THE CITY.
>> Sreenivasan: TURNING TO THE
SITUATION IN NORTH KOREA, I AM
JOINED VIA SKYPE BY JEAN LEE, A
CORRESPONDENT FOR THE ASSOCIATED
PRESS ON THE KOREAN PENINSULA,
AND NOW A FELLOW WITH THE WILSON
CENTER.
SHE IS IN THE SOUTH KOREAN
CAPITAL CITY OF SEOUL.
SO, MISS LEE, THIS MORNING,
WE'VE HAD PICTURES OF THE BIG
PARADES.
THE THING THAT EVERYONE WAS VERY
CONCERNED ABOUT, ANY SORT OF A
TEST OF A NUCLEAR MISSILE,
THAT DID NOT HAPPEN.
>> THAT DOESN'T MEAN IT WON'T
HAPPEN.
I THINK IT'S NOT A MATTER OF
WHETHER IT WILL HAPPEN.
I'M FAIRLY CONFIDENT THAT IT
WILL HAPPEN AT SOME POINT.
NORTH KOREA HAS MADE IT VERY
CLEAR THAT THEY ARE GOING TO
PUSH AHEAD WITH THEIR ILLICIT
BALLISTIC MISSILE AND WEAPONS
PROGRAM.
AND CERTAINLY WHAT WE SAW IN THE
PARADE HERE, IN PYONGYANG,
EARLIER THIS MORNING, SHOWED US
THAT THEY ARE CONTINUING TO
BUILD SOME PRETTY
FEARSOME-LOOKING WEAPONS DESPITE
U.N. SECURITY COUNCIL
RESOLUTIONS THAT BAN THEM FROM
BUILDING THESE WEAPONS.
>> Sreenivasan: HOW TENSE WAS
THE SITUATION OVER THE LAST 24,
48 HOURS?
IN SOME WAYS, SOUTH KOREANS,
THEY'VE BEEN THROUGH THIS DRILL
BEFORE.
>> SOUTH KOREANS ARE LARGELY
UNFAZED.
THE PEOPLE OF SOUTH KOREA ARE
LARGELY UNFAZED.
YOU WOULD BE HARD PRESSED ON THE
STREETS OF SEOUL TODAY TO TELL
THAT THERE WAS THIS KIND OF A
CRISIS GOING ON.
THEY'RE REALLY CONCERNED ABOUT A
POLITICAL UPHEAVAL RIGHT NOW.
THEY IMPEACHED THEIR PRESIDENT.
THEY'VE GOT A PRESIDENTIAL
ELECTION COMING UP IN A FEW
WEEKS.
AND ACTUALLY, THEY WERE OUT IN
THE STREETS TODAY.
IT WAS ONE OF THE FIRST
BEAUTIFUL SPRING DAYS.
THAT SAID, CERTAINLY WITHIN THE
GOVERNMENT AND AMONG THE
PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES THERE
WAS A LOT OF CONCERN ABOUT SOME
OF THE LANGUAGE COMING FROM
WASHINGTON, PARTICULARLY
PRESIDENT TRUMP SAYING THAT THE
U.S. WOULD DEAL WITH NORTH KOREA
ON ITS OWN IF CHINA DIDN'T JUMP
IN.
THAT IS THE TYPE OF LANGUAGE
THAT SOUTH KOREA DOES NOT WANT
TO HEAR, AND EVERY SINGLE ONE OF
THE PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES
ADDRESSED THIS AND SAID THE U.S.
REALLY NEEDS TO CONSULT WITH
SOUTH KOREA.
THEY NEED TO BE IN THE LOOP ON
ANYTHING TO DO WITH NORTH KOREA
BECAUSE THIS IS THE COUNTRY THAT
WOULD BEAR THE BRUNT OF ANY KIND
OF MILITARY ACTION.
>> Sreenivasan: VICE PRESIDENT
PENCE IS ON HIS WAY TO THE
REGION STARTING TOMORROW.
AS YOU MENTIONED, IF THE SOUTH
KOREAN GOVERNMENT IS KIND OF IN
A STATE OF FLUX, WHO DOES HE
MEET WITH?
HOW DOES THE REGION RESOLVE
ISSUES WITH THE LEADERSHIP IN
SOUTH KOREA, KNOWING THAT THAT'S
GOING TO CHANGE IN A FEW WEEKS?
>> THIS CERTAINLY PUTS SEOUL AT
A DISADVANTAGE TO HAVE THIS TYPE
OF A POLITICAL VACUUM AT SUCH A
CRUCIAL TIME WHEN THE TRUMP
ADMINISTRATION IS DEVELOPING ITS
NORTH KOREAN POLICY.
BUT PART OF WHAT HE WANTS TO DO
IS REASSURE SEOUL AND TOKYO AND
OTHER PARTNERS IN THE REGION
THAT THE U.S. STANDS FIRM,
DESPITE SOME OF THE LANGUAGE
COMING OUT OF WASHINGTON.
AND HE WILL BE MEETING WITH THE
ACTING PRESIDENT ON MONDAY.
SO HE IS TRYING TO MAKE A POINT
THAT, YES, THEY REALIZE THAT
SOUTH KOREA IS IN POLITICAL
TRANSITION, BUT THAT THEY
REMAIN-- THEY REMAIN COMMITTED
TO THIS LONG-STANDING
U.S.-SOUTH KOREAN ALLIANCE.
>> Sreenivasan: WHILE SOUTH
KOREA IS KIND OF DIRECTLY IN THE
CROSSHAIRS IF THERE WAS ANY SORT
OF MILITARY ACTION FROM NORTH
KOREA WE ARE ALSO SEEING REPORTS
THAT JAPAN IS, IN A WAY, TRYING
TO TAKE MEASURES AND TRYING TO
FIGURE OUT CONTINGENCY PLANS.
>> JAPAN IS NERVOUS AS WELL.
WE HAVE TO REMEMBER THAT ONE OF
THE RECENT BALLISTIC MISSILE
LAUNCHES WAS TARGETED TOWARD
JAPAN.
A NUMBER OF THESE BALLISTIC
MISSILES LANDED WITHIN A FEW
HUNDRED MILES FROM THE JAPANESE
SHORES.
SO THIS IS CERTAINLY SENT TO--
WAS MEANT TO SEND A MESSAGE TO
JAPAN BUT HAS TOKYO NERVOUS AS
WELL, SO I DID SEE THOSE REPORTS
THAT JAPAN WAS PERHAPS
PRACTICING TO EVACUATE ITS
CITIZENS AND CERTAINLY ONE OF
THE THINGS PENCE WANTS TO DO BY
COMING IS SHOW HE HAS CONFIDENCE
IN THE REGION.
>> Sreenivasan: ALL RIGHT,
JEAN LEE FROM THE ASSOCIATED
PRESS JOINING US VIA SKYPE FROM
SEOUL.
THANKS SO MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Sreenivasan: SINCE THE START
OF THE TRUMP ADMINISTRATION,
THERE HAS BEEN A SURGE OF
IMMIGRANTS, MOSTLY UNDOCUMENTED,
FROM THE UNITED STATES TO
CANADA.
THEY'RE CROSSING THE OPEN
NORTHERN BORDER ON FOOT, MOST
SAY, BECAUSE OF THEIR FEAR OVER
MR. TRUMP'S IMMIGRATION
POLICIES, INCLUDING EXECUTIVE
ORDERS SEEKING TO BAN IMMIGRANTS
FROM CERTAIN COUNTRIES, AND
RECENT ROUNDUPS OF UNDOCUMENTED
IMMIGRANTS.
IN TONIGHT'S SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND SPECIAL
CORRESPONDENT LISA DESAI REPORTS
FROM MANITOBA, CANADA, ON SOME
WHO HAVE MADE THIS PERILOUS
JOURNEY.
>> Reporter: MUCH OF THE 4,000-
MILE AMERICAN BORDER WITH CANADA
IS WIDE OPEN AND UNSECURED.
IN THE FIRST THREE MONTHS OF
THIS YEAR, A STEADY STREAM OF
IMMIGRANTS FROM ALL OVER THE
WORLD BRAVED THE BITTER COLD TO
REACH A COUNTRY WHERE THEY
BELIEVE THERE'S LESS RISK OF
DETENTION AND DEPORTATION.
JUST NORTH OF MINNESOTA AND
NORTH DAKOTA LIES THE CANADIAN
PROVINCE OF MANITOBA.
THE TOWN OF EMERSON IS A MAIN
ENTRY POINT.
AN HOUR'S DRIVE NORTH IS THE
PROVINCIAL CAPITAL, WINNIPEG, A
CITY OF 700,000.
THAT'S WHERE I MET THIS WOMAN
FROM SOMALIA.
FOR HER SAFETY, WE AGREED TO
SHIELD HER FACE AND CALL HER
"NASRA."
SHE SETTLED IN MINNEAPOLIS ON A
U.S. MEDICAL VISA TO GET
TREATMENT FOR HER SIX-YEAR-OLD
AUTISTIC SON.
HER FAMILY IS PART OF A MINORITY
CLAN PERSECUTED IN SOMALIA'S
CIVIL WAR.
>> (translated): I FACED A
LOT OF PROBLEMS IN SOMALIA.
DURING THE WAR, MY FATHER AND MY
BROTHER WERE ATTACKED, AND MY
MOTHER AND I ENDURED SO MUCH
PAIN.
WE LEFT AND NEVER WENT BACK.
>> THIS IS THE PROTECTION OF THE
NATION FROM FOREIGN TERRORIST
ENTRY.
>> Reporter: AFTER PRESIDENT
TRUMP LISTED SOMALIA AS ONE OF
THE COUNTRIES WHOSE CITIZENS
WOULD BE BLOCKED FROM ENTERING
THE U.S., NASRA, WHO HAD
OVERSTAYED HER VISA, DECIDED
IT WASN'T SAFE TO STAY.
>> (translated): I HEARD THAT
THEY WERE GOING TO ARREST PEOPLE
AND TAKE THEM BACK TO SOMALIA,
AND THAT THEY WERE GOING INTO
PEOPLE'S HOMES, AND THEY WERE
GOING TO SEPARATE FAMILIES,
MOTHERS FROM CHILDREN.
>> Reporter: WHAT WOULD HAPPEN
IF YOU WERE DEPORTED BACK TO
SOMALIA?
>> (translated): IF I GO BACK
TO SOMALIA, I WON'T STAND A
CHANCE THERE.
I WOULD BE KILLED.
>> Reporter: IN FEBRUARY, SHE
LEFT MINNEAPOLIS AND BECAME ONE
OF NEARLY 1,000 MIGRANTS,
ACCORDING TO THE CANADIAN
GOVERNMENT, TO CROSS FROM THE
U.S. INTO CANADA THIS YEAR.
SHE PAID A DRIVER TO TAKE HER
AND HER SON MOST OF THE WAY.
>> (translated): WE WALKED FOR
HOURS.
THE SNOW WAS FALLING.
WE COULDN'T SEE.
IT WAS COLD, IT WAS DARK, AND IF
IT WASN'T FOR GOD, WE WOULD HAVE
DIED.
>> Reporter: UNDER CANADIAN LAW,
PEOPLE LIKE NASRA, WHO CROSS THE
BORDER ILLEGALLY, ARE ARRESTED
AND TAKEN IN FOR A BACKGROUND
CHECK.
IF THEY DON'T HAVE A CRIMINAL
RECORD, THEY ARE OFTEN RELEASED
WITHIN 24 HOURS.
THEY'RE APPOINTED A GOVERNMENT
LAWYER TO REPRESENT THEM IN
THEIR ASYLUM HEARING, WHICH
USUALLY TAKES PLACE IN TWO
MONTHS.
THEY ARE ALSO CONNECTED WITH
NON-PROFITS THAT PROVIDE FOOD
AND HOUSING.
>> WELL, THESE ARE DONATIONS
THAT'S BEEN GIVEN TO THE
ORGANIZATIONS FOR THE NEWCOMERS.
WHAT ARE YOU LOOKING FOR IN
PARTICULAR?
>> Reporter: YASMIN ALI HEADS UP
THE CANADIAN WOMEN MUSLIM
INSTITUTE, A WINNIPEG NON-PROFIT
THAT HELPS REFUGEES LIKE NASRA.
SINCE JANUARY, ALI SAYS SHE'S
RECEIVED A SURGE IN CLIENTS
CROSSING FROM THE U.S.
>> WE HELP THEM WITH FINDING
PLACES TO LIVE, THINGS TO FILL
THEIR APARTMENT, SO THEY HAVE--
BECAUSE WHEN THEY COME, THEY ARE
VERY LIMITED IN INCOME.
>> Reporter: WITH ONLY A FEW
PAID STAFF MEMBERS AND NO
GOVERNMENT FUNDS, THE INSTITUTE
RELIES ON VOLUNTEERS AND
DONATIONS.
>> IT'S VERY HARD TO BE
WANDERING THE WORLD WITH
FAMILIES AND CHILDREN AND NOT
KNOW WHERE YOU'RE GOING TO LIVE,
NOT KNOW YOU'RE GOING TO BE
SETTLED DOWN AND BE SAFE.
SO THEY'RE JUST LOOKING FOR A
SAFE PLACE WHERE THEY CAN RAISE
THEIR FAMILIES AND LIVE.
>> Reporter: MANITOBA INTERFAITH
IMMIGRATION COUNCIL IS ANOTHER
NON-PROFIT THAT PROVIDES
SETTLEMENT AND LEGAL SERVICES TO
REFUGEES AND ASYLUM SEEKERS IN
WINNIPEG.
>> JUST WANTED TO SAY HI.
I'M RITA.
>> Reporter: RITA CHAHAL IS THE
EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR.
>> JUST IN THIS MONTH ALONE
WE'VE HAD FOUR UNACCOMPANIED
MINORS.
>> Reporter: CHAHAL SAYS THE
PEOPLE SEEKING ASYLUM COME FROM
ALL OVER THE WORLD, NOT JUST THE
COUNTRIES INCLUDED IN
PRESIDENT'S TRUMP'S PROPOSED
TRAVEL BAN.
>> THEY ARE COMING FROM PLACES
LIKE BANGLADESH, CHINA, GERMANY.
WE'VE CERTAINLY SEEN A NUMBER OF
THEM IN THE LAST LITTLE WHILE,
LAST FEW WEEKS, COMING FROM
CENTRAL AMERICA, FROM GUATEMALA,
NICARAGUA.
>> Reporter: ONE OF THOSE
UNDOCUMENTED MIGRANTS FROM
HONDURAS IS ALEXANCO.
HE SAYS HE LEFT FOR THE U.S.
FIVE YEARS AGO BECAUSE DRUG
CARTELS HAD THREATENED TO KILL
HIM.
LAST MONTH, HE LEFT FLORIDA FOR
CANADA WITH HIS WIFE AND BABY.
SO WHY DID YOU DECIDE TO MOVE TO
CANADA?
>> (translated): WE STARTED TO
BECOME VERY AFRAID, BECAUSE
EVERY MORNING AND EVERY DAY WE
WATCHED THE NEWS, WE WATCHED
MANY FRIENDS WITH THEIR KIDS.
PEOPLE WHO WERE DEPORTED,
SEPARATED FROM THEIR FAMILIES,
THAT WAS ONE OF MY BIGGEST FEARS
THAT WE HAD ABOUT LIVING IN THE
UNITED STATES.
>> Reporter: FEARS CANADIAN
PRIME MINISTER JUSTIN TRUDEAU
HAS BEEN TRYING TO CALM, EVEN
DURING A RECENT VISIT TO THE
WHITE HOUSE.
>> WE CONTINUE TO PURSUE OUR
POLICIES OF OPENNESS TOWARDS
IMMIGRATION, REFUGEES, WITHOUT
COMPROMISING SECURITY.
>> Reporter: THAT POLICY IS NOW
BEING CRITICIZED IN EMERSON.
>> THIS IS THE ACTUAL
INTERNATIONAL BORDER, RIGHT IN
FRONT OF US.
SO IT'S UNMANNED.
NO FENCES, NO GATES.
>> Reporter: EMERSON MAYOR GREG
JANZEN SAYS THE BORDER CROSSINGS
ARE PUTTING A STRAIN ON THE
TOWN'S LESS THAN 700 RESIDENTS.
VOLUNTEER FIREFIGHTERS RESCUED
MIGRANTS STUCK IN SNOWSTORMS,
AND SINCE LAST NOVEMBER, HALF
THE TOWN'S MEDICAL CALLS HAVE
BEEN TO HELP ASYLUM SEEKERS.
>> THAT IS CONCERNING FOR US IN
EMERSON, AND THE CANADIANS, JUST
BECAUSE WE'RE NOT DETAINING
ANYONE, WE'RE NOT PUNISHING
ANYONE FOR BREAKING THE LAW.
SO OUR BORDER RIGHT NOW IS AT
RISK OF KIND OF BEING A JOKE.
>> Reporter: CURRENTLY, UNDER
THE SAFE THIRD COUNTRY AGREEMENT
BETWEEN THE U.S. AND CANADA,
REFUGEES MUST APPLY FOR ASYLUM
IN THE FIRST COUNTRY THEY ENTER.
REFUGEES WHO'VE ALREADY APPLIED
IN THE U.S. AND PRESENT
THEMSELVES AT AN OFFICIAL
CANADIAN BORDER CROSSING ARE
SUPPOSED TO BE TURNED AWAY, BUT
ANYONE WHO SNEAKS ACROSS THE
CANADIAN BORDER HAS THE RIGHT TO
APPLY FOR ASYLUM.
A POLL LAST MONTH FOUND CANADIAN
SUPPORT FOR WELCOMING REFUGEES
IS SLIPPING.
48% SAID CANADA SHOULD SEND
THESE MIGRANTS BACK TO THE U.S.
36% SAID CANADA SHOULD ACCEPT
THEM.
THE ILLEGAL BORDER CROSSINGS ARE
STARTING TO WEAR THIN ON SOME
EMERSON RESIDENTS.
>> I THINK TRUDEAU SHOULD HAVE
TO COME AND SPEND TWO WEEKS HERE
IN EMERSON IN ONE OF THE HOUSES,
AND SEE HOW HIS WIFE AND
CHILDREN FEEL WITH THESE PEOPLE
CROSSING THE BORDER AND BANGING
ON HIS DOOR AND WINDOWS AT ALL
HOURS OF THE NIGHT.
>> IF THEY'RE ALREADY SETTLED IN
THE STATES, WHY CAN'T THEY GO
BACK TO THE STATES?
RIGHT?
I DON'T UNDERSTAND IT.
I REALLY DON'T, BUT I HOPE
SOMETHING GETS DONE SOON SO THAT
WE CAN LIVE IN PEACE AGAIN.
>> THIS IS ALSO FOR YOU.
THIS ALSO FOR YOU.
THIS IS NOT FOR YOU.
>> Reporter: ONE OF THE
VOLUNTEERS AT THE CANADIAN WOMEN
MUSLIM INSTITUTE IN WINNIPEG IS
AHMED OSAA, A REFUGEE WHO FLED
THE UNITED STATES AND IS
ORIGINALLY FROM THE WEST AFRICAN
NATION OF GHANA.
OSAA IS GAY, AND IN GHANA,
HOMOSEXUALITY IS A CRIME.
WHY DID YOU DECIDE TO LEAVE
GHANA?
>> I WAS AFRAID FOR MY LIFE AND
I KNEW IF I STAYED, MAYBE
SOMEBODY, ONE DAY, SOMEBODY
MIGHT KILL ME.
AND I DON'T WANT TO DIE NOW.
>> Reporter: OSAA LEFT GHANA IN
2013 FOR ECUADOR, BUT IT
REJECTED HIS ASYLUM CLAIM.
THREE YEARS LATER, HE MADE IT TO
MEXICO AND PAID SMUGGLERS TO
TAKE HIM TO BROWNSVILLE, TEXAS,
WHERE HE TURNED HIMSELF INTO THE
BORDER PATROL.
>> I PRESENTED MYSELF AND TOLD
THEM, "OH, I'M HERE TO SEEK
ASYLUM."
THEY STARTED CHAINING MY HAND,
MY WAIST, AND MY LEGS.
THEN I STARTED CRYING.
>> Reporter: OSAA SPENT SIX
MONTHS IN AN IMMIGRATION
DETENTION CENTER IN
PENNSYLVANIA, AND HIS ASYLUM
CLAIM WAS DENIED.
RELEASED FROM CUSTODY BUT
SUBJECT TO A DEPORTATION ORDER,
OSAA MADE HIS WAY TO MINNEAPOLIS
TO LIVE WITH A FRIEND.
OSAA PLANNED HIS TRIP TO CANADA
RIGHT AFTER PRESIDENT TRUMP WAS
ELECTED, FEARING EVEN THEN HE'D
BE FORCIBLY SENT BACK TO GHANA.
>> IF I'M SENT BACK TO GHANA,
FOR EXAMPLE, I CAN EVEN GO TO
JAIL, AND I DON'T WANT TO GO TO
JAIL.
>> Reporter: OSAA CROSSED THE
BORDER, AND CANADA GRANTED HIM
ASYLUM, MAKING HIM A LEGAL
RESIDENT.
HE NOW RECEIVES A GOVERNMENT
STIPEND EQUIVALENT TO $540 U.S.
A MONTH UNTIL HE RECEIVES A WORK
PERMIT.
>> I WOULD SAY, IN CANADA, I'M
TREATED WITH DIGNITY AND
RESPECT; BUT IN THE UNITED
STATES, NO, I WASN'T.
I WASN'T TREATED WITH DIGNITY.
NOW, I HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED AS A
REFUGEE IN CANADA.
I'M OKAY NOW.
I'M HAPPY TO BE PART OF THE
CANADIAN PEOPLE.
>> Reporter: NASRA, THE SOMALI
REFUGEE WHO SNUCK ACROSS THE
BORDER WITH HER SON TWO MONTHS
AGO, IS WAITING FOR THEIR ASYLUM
HEARING.
WHAT'S YOUR HOPE NOW FOR THE
FUTURE FOR YOU AND YOUR SON IN
HERE IN CANADA?
>> (translated): WHAT I HOPE
FOR IS TO LIVE IN A PLACE OF
PEACE, WHERE I CAN BE HEALTHY; A
PLACE WHERE THERE IS NO WAR, NO
FIGHTING, NO KILLING.
GOD WILLING, I PRAY FOR THAT.
>> Sreenivasan: READ ABOUT A
SAFE HOUSE IN ARIZONA WHERE
UNDOCUMENTED CENTRAL AMERICAN
FAMILIES TAKE REFUGE AS THEY
SEEK ASYLUM.
VISIT www.pbs.org/newshour.
IN THE NATION'S CAPITAL AND
OTHER CITIES TODAY, THOUSANDS OF
DEMONSTRATORS CALLED FOR
PRESIDENT TRUMP TO RELEASE HIS
PERSONAL TAX RETURNS.
THE MARCHES OCCURRED ON THE DAY
THAT IS USUALLY THE DEADLINE FOR
ALL AMERICANS TO FILE THEIR
RETURNS-- THAT'S TUESDAY THIS
YEAR, DUE TO THE EASTER HOLIDAY
WEEKEND.
NO PRESIDENT IS REQUIRED TO
RELEASE HIS TAXES, BUT EVERY
MAJOR PARTY NOMINEE FOR
PRESIDENT HAS DONE SO SINCE THE
'70s.
BEYOND THE MARCHES, ABOUT HALF
OF THE NATION'S STATE
LEGISLATURES HAVE SEEN BILLS
INTRODUCED TO REQUIRE ALL FUTURE
PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES TO
RELEASE THEIR TAX RETURNS IN
ORDER TO BE PLACED ON THE
STATE'S BALLOT.
MOST PROPOSALS ARE IN STATES
THAT VOTED DEMOCRATIC LAST YEAR,
BUT NO STATE HAS ADOPTED SUCH A
LAW YET, AND THEY WOULD LIKELY
FACE CONSTITUTIONAL CHALLENGES.
THERE'S A SIMILAR BILL PENDING
IN CONGRESS, AS WELL.
PEPPERDINE UNIVERSITY LAW SCHOOL
PROFESSOR DEREK MULLER IS
FOLLOWING THIS ISSUE AND JOINS
ME NOW FROM LOS ANGELES TO
DISCUSS IT.
YOU STUDY ELECTION LAW.
WHAT'S THE CHANCE OF ONE OF
THESE LAWS IN ONE OF THESE
STATES PASSING?
>> WELL, I THINK THERE'S A
DECENT CHANCE THEY'LL GET
ENACTED.
WHEN YOU HAVE ENOUGH STATES WITH
ENOUGH PROPOSED LAWS, SURELY IN
A PLACE LIKE CALIFORNIA, NEW
YORK, I THINK THERE IS DECENT
ODDS THEY'LL PASS ONE OF THE
LEGISLATURES.
THERE'S ONE THAT'S ENACTED IN
NEW JERSEY RIGHT NOW.
IT'S SITTING ON THE
GOVERNOR'S DESK, AND WE'VE SEEN
SUBSTANTIAL MOVEMENT IN PLACES
LIKE MASSACHUSETTS, CONNECTICUT
AND ELSEWHERE AROUND THE
COUNTRY.
>> Sreenivasan: WHAT IS THE
LIKELIHOOD, EVEN IF ONE OF THESE
LAWS ARE PASSED, THAT THE
PRESIDENT ACTUALLY HAS TO DO
THIS?
>> SO I THINK THAT'S WHERE THERE
ARE SOME INTERESTING
CONSTITUTIONAL CHALLENGES.
ON THE ONE HAND, I THINK IT'S
VERY DIFFICULT TO SAY THAT
STATES CAN ADD QUALIFICATIONS TO
THE OFFICE OF PRESIDENT.
WE'RE VERY FAMILIAR WITH THOSE
QUALIFICATIONS-- YOU HAVE TO BE
35 YEARS OLD, A NATURAL-BORN
CITIZEN, 14 YEARS A RESIDENT OF
THE UNITED STATES.
PROPONENTS ARE SAYING WE'RE NOT
ADDING QUALIFICATIONS.
ALL WE'RE DOING IS REGULATING
ACCESS TO THE BALLOT AND I THINK
THAT'S A CHALLENGE AS WELL.
IN A LOT OF CASES THAT HANDLE
BALLOT ACCESS, THEY SAY, LOOK,
YOU WANT TO MAKE SURE THAT THE
BALLOT SEPARATES SERIOUS FROM
FRIVOLOUS CANDIDATES.
KEEPING FRIVOLOUS CANDIDATES OFF
THE BALLOT REQUIRES THEM TO,
SAY, GET 500 SIGNATURES ON A
PETITION, TO GET 1% OF OF THE
STATE'S REGISTERED VOTERS TO
SIGN A PETITION.
AND NO COURT HAS EVER SORT OF
AUTHORIZED THE USE OF THE BALLOT
AS SORT OF A TOOL TO ACHIEVE
SOME PREFERRED POLICY OUTCOME.
SO I THINK THERE'S A REAL
CONSTITUTIONAL CHALLENGE TO SOME
OF THESE ISSUES THAT I THINK
PROPONENTS WOULD FACE, IF SUCH
BILLS ARE ENACTED.
>> Sreenivasan: YOU ALSO ARGUED
IN A RECENT OP-ED THAT IT
SHOULDN'T HAPPEN AS SORT OF A
BLUNT INSTRUMENT.
THERE COULD BE UNINTENDED
CONSEQUENCES.
>> THAT'S RIGHT.
SO, I THINK WE FORGET THAT FOR A
LOT OF CANDIDATES THEY HAVEN'T
DISCLOSED THEIR TAXES.
ROSS PEROT DIDN'T DISCLOSE HIS
TAXES.
GERALD FORD DIDN'T DISCLOSE ALL
HIS TAXES.
THERE ARE DISPUTES ABOUT WHETHER
CANDIDATES' WIVES SHOULD
DISCLOSE THEIR TAX RETURNS.
JOHN KERRY DIDN'T DISCLOSE HIS
WIFE'S TAX RETURNS, OR JOHN
McCAIN.
AND THERE ARE DISPUTES HOW MANY
TAX RETURNS SHOULD BE DISCLOSED.
RONALD REGAN DISCLOSED I THINK
30 TAX RETURNS.
JOHN McCAIN AND MITT ROMNEY EACH
DECIDED TO ONLY DISCLOSE TWO.
SO THERE ARE A LOT OF POLITICAL
FIGHTS WE'VE HAD ABOUT THIS AND
OVER THE YEARS IT'S SORT OF
EBBED AND FLOWED AND REACHED AN
EQUILIBRIUM WHERE WE EXPECT IT.
AND I THINK THE CHALLENGE IS
DONALD TRUMP HAS NOT MET THE
EXPECTATIONS OF MANY PEOPLE AND
I THINK IT'S A QUESTION ABOUT
WHETHER OR NOT WE WANT TO CODIFY
THIS IN TO A STATUTE FOR 2020
AND GOING FORWARD.
>> Sreenivasan: ARE THERE
OTHER WAYS TO RESOLVE THIS AND
CREATE AN INCENTIVE FOR HIM OR
ANYONE TO REVEAL THEIR TAXES?
>> I THINK THE POLITICAL PROCESS
IS WHERE THAT USUALLY HAPPENS
BUT THE POLITICAL PROCESS HAS
ITS LIMITATIONS.
YOU CAN TRY TO ASK QUESTIONS OF
THE CANDIDATES.
YOU CAN ASK AT TOWN HALL
MEETINGS OR PUBLIC FORUMS.
YOU CAN MEDIA SORT OF PRESS THE
ISSUE, BUT AT THE END OF THE DAY
IT IS REALLY LEFT TO THE VOTERS
TO DECIDE HOW MUCH IT MATTERS
AND IN CALIFORNIA, NEW YORK, AND
NEW JERSEY, I'M SURE IT HURT
MR. TRUMP.
BUT IN PLACES LIKE THE MIDWEST,
IT APPEARED THAT VOTERS DIDN'T
PARTICULARLY CARE.
SO WE HAVE A POLITICAL PROCESS
THAT WOULD ALLOW THIS TO PLAY
OUT.
AGAIN, MAYBE SOME PEOPLE ARE
JUST NOT AS HAPPY WITH HOW IT
PLAYED OUT IN 2016.
>> Sreenivasan: DEREK MULLER
FROM THE PEPERDINE UNIVERSITY
SCHOOL OF LAW, THANKS SO MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>>THIS IS PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND,
SATURDAY.
>> Sreenivasan: PRESIDENT TRUMP
IS ALREADY BANKING MONEY FOR HIS
RE-ELECTION.
THE CAMPAIGN AND THE REPUBLICAN
NATIONAL COMMITTEE RAISED A
COMBINED $42 MILLION IN THE
FIRST THREE MONTHS OF THIS YEAR,
ACCORDING TO FEDERAL ELECTION
COMMISSION REPORTS.
PARTY OFFICIALS SAY 250,000
PEOPLE CONTRIBUTED ONLINE.
THE CAMPAIGN AND THE PARTY ALSO
SPENT HALF A MILLION DOLLARS ON
LODGING AND CATERING AT TRUMP
HOTELS AND RESTAURANTS.
UNITED AIRLINES SAYS IT WILL NO
LONGER BUMP PASSENGERS ALREADY
SEATED ON PLANES, AND WILL NOT
ALLOW CREW MEMBERS TO TAKE A
PASSENGER SEAT UNLESS THAT IS
ARRANGED AT LEAST AN HOUR BEFORE
TAKEOFF.
A SPOKESMAN TOLD N.P.R. THE
CHANGE IS TO AVOID A REPEAT OF
THIS CHICAGO-TO-LOUISVILLE
FLIGHT LAST WEEKEND, WHEN THE
AIRLINE FORCIBLY REMOVED A 69-
YEAR-OLD DOCTOR AFTER HE REFUSED
TO GIVE UP HIS SEAT TO A CREW
MEMBER.
A FEDERAL JUDGE TODAY BLOCKED
ARKANSAS FROM CARRYING OUT
EXECUTIONS OF SIX DEATH ROW
EXECUTIONS OVER 11 DAYS.
THE STATE WAS TO BEGIN THE
EXECUTIONS MONDAY BY LETHAL
INJECTION, TWO WEEKS BEFORE ITS
SUPPLY OF A DRUG USED TO SEDATE
THE CONDEMNED EXPIRES.
THE JUDGE RULED PRISONERS MAY
CHALLENGE THE EXECUTION METHOD
TO SHOW IT CREATES A "RISK OF
SEVERE PAIN."
THE STATE PLANS TO APPEAL.
YESTERDAY, A STATE JUDGE BLOCKED
ARKANSAS FROM USING ANOTHER DRUG
THAT STOPS BREATHING.
MANUFACTURERS OBJECT TO THEIR
DRUGS BEING USED IN EXECUTIONS,
LEAVING STATES WITH SHORTAGES.
UPDATING A STORY WE BROUGHT YOU
IN JANUARY, NEW YORK STATE NOW
REQUIRES ANYONE SENT TO ADULT
JAILS AND PRISONS TO BE 18.
THE LAW, SIGNED BY GOVERNOR
ANDREW CUOMO THIS WEEK, ALSO
DIVERTS 16- OR 17-YEAR-OLDS
ACCUSED OF MISDEMEANORS AND
NONVIOLENT FELONIES TO FAMILY
COURT.
JUVENILES ACCUSED OF MORE
SERIOUS CRIMES WILL BE PROCESSED
IN NEW YOUTH COURTS.
NORTH CAROLINA IS NOW THE ONLY
STATE THAT INCARCERATES 16- AND
17-YEAR-OLDS WITH ADULTS.
THE LEGISLATION ALSO REQUIRES
NEW YORK CITY TO MOVE OUT ALL
16- AND 17-YEAR-OLDS FROM THE
RIKERS ISLAND JAIL BY OCTOBER
2018.
>> Sreenivasan: FINALLY, THE
WOMAN THOUGHT TO BE THE WORLD'S
OLDEST PERSON AND THE LAST ONE
BORN IN THE 1800s DIED TODAY
AT HER HOME IN NORTHERN ITALY.
EMMA MORANO WAS 117 YEARS OLD.
SHE CREDITED HER LONGEVITY TO
GENETICS AND EATING THREE EGGS A
DAY, TWO OF THEM RAW.
MORANO'S LIFE SPANNED THREE
CENTURIES AND ALMOST 100 ITALIAN
GOVERNMENTS.
THAT'S ALL FOR THIS EDITION OF
PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
THANKS FOR WATCHING.
I'M HARI SREENIVASAN.